# Bellworthy_planulae_insitu_translocation
Raw data and code for: "Genomic, morphological and physiological insights into coral acclimation along the depth gradient following an in situ transplantation of planulae". Authored by Jessica Bellworthy, Federica Scucchia, Gretchen Goodbody-Gringley, Tali Mass


Abstract
Mesophotic coral reefs have been proposed as refugia for corals, providing shelter and larval propagules for shallow-water reefs that are disproportionately challenged by global climate change and local anthropogenic stressors. Yet, knowledge of the capacity of coral larvae to adjust to different depth environments is still limited. In this study, planulae of the reef-building coral Stylophora pistillata from 5-8 and 40-44 m depth in the Gulf of Aqaba were tested in a long-term in situ translocation experiment for their ability to settle and acclimate to reciprocal depth conditions. We assessed survival rates, photochemical, physiological and morphological characteristics, as well as gene expression variations in juveniles grown at different depths, comparing them to non-translocated adults, juveniles and planulae. We found high mortality rates among mesophotic-origin planulae, irrespective of translocation depth. Gene expression patterns suggested that deep planulae lacked settlement competency and experienced increased developmental stress upon release. Symbiont photochemical acclimation to depth occurred rapidly within 8 days, with symbiont populations showing changes in photochemical traits but no symbiont species shuffling between deep and shallow juveniles. In contrast, coral host physiological and morphological acclimation were less evident. We observed minimal overlap in gene expression patterns between different life stages and depths, indicating that gene expression significantly depends on life stage. The study also identified a set of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with initial stress responses following translocation, latent stress response, and environmental effects of depth. In conclusion, though our data reveal rapid symbiont acclimation, host acclimation to match deep coral phenotypes was incomplete within 60 days for planulae translocated to different depths. Therefore, at this site, the potential for mesophotic origin S. pistillata planulae to recruit to the shallow reef is low, however there remains potential for shallow planulae to survive at mesophotic depths.
